---
title: "The Secret History of Constitutional Dignity"
author:
  name: "Samuel Moyn"
  affiliation: "Columbia University"
booktitle: "Understanding Human Dignity"
editor: "Christopher McCrudden"
publisher: "Oxford University Press"
year: 2013
pages: "95–112"
isbn: "9780197265826"
citation_key: "Moyn2013_SecretHistory"
keywords: ["constitutional law", "human dignity", "legal history"]
abstract: |
  This chapter delves into the historical development of the concept of constitutional dignity, revealing its complex and often overlooked origins in legal thought.
---

# **The Secret History of Constitutional Dignity**

#### *Samuel Moyn1*

IN THE NAME OF the Most Holy Trinity, from Whom all authority and to Whom, as our final end, all actions both of men and States must be referred,

We, the people of Eire,

Humbly acknowledging all our obligations to our Divine Lord, Jesus Christ, Who sustained our fathers through centuries of trial,

Gratefully remembering their heroic and unremitting struggle to regain the rightful independence of our Nation,

And seeking to promote the common good, with due observance of Prudence, Justice and Charity, so that the dignity and freedom of the individual may be assured, true social order attained, the unity of our country restored, and concord established with other nations,

Do hereby adopt, enact, and give to ourselves this Constitution. Preamble, Irish Constitution of 1937

### Introduction: dignity, Christianity, and democracy

In the prevalent narrative of public law after the Second World War, it is dignitarian constitutionalism-channelling Immanuel Kant's Enlightenment insistence on individual human worth into the United Nations Charter, the

*Proceedings of the British Academy,* 192,95-111. ©The British Academy 2013.

<sup>1</sup> I am grateful to Josef Ansorge for doing much of the Irish research for this chapter, and to Yale Law School for funding his work, as well as to James Chappel for advice, and Sanford Diehl for supplementary help. A longer version of this chapter, with fuller attention to the drafting of the Irish Constitution and other further detail, is forthcoming in the *Yale Journal of Human Rights and Development Law.* 

/ Universal Declaration, and the West German Basic Law, all three of which· begin with the dignity of the individual as basic principle-that responded to the Holocaust as the nadir of Western civilization. Though it took some time, dignity then proceeded in the last few decades-in tandem with the larger fortunes of international human rights-to become a crucial watchword, going global in various constitutions and international treaties, and offering judicial guidance for the protection of basic values.2 Certainly it is the case that interest in dignity swarms in legal cases and philosophical discussions today in ways that demand explanation.

Yet, as Jiirgen Habermas has recently acknowledged, the appeal to dignity had not been required at any point for the constitutionalization of rights, either in 1776 in Virginia or in 1789 (or again in 1946) in France. 3 Conversely, West Germans writing the Basic Law were not yet concerned by the Jewish tragedy. And while it is true that Kant occasionally referenced dignity, none of his political disciples have made anything of this fact-and his current philosophical disciples only in the last few years. In any case, there were no Kantians in Germany of note after the Second World War, nor really anywhere else.4 Contrary to familiar beliefs, it was not West Germany that first constitutionalized dignity as a leading principle anyway. That distinction belongs to the Irish.

In their 1937 constitution, the Irish gave it foundational placement, as a religiously inspired root concept connected (as in the later West German case) to the subordination of the otherwise sovereign democratic polity to God, and for many to the moral constraints of his natural law. This chapter tal}es up this neglected but revealing fact. It is critical, I contend in what follows, that dignity came to the world as part of the establishment of an alternative

<sup>2</sup> Samuel Moyn, *The Last Utopia: Human Rights in History* (Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press, 201 0).

<sup>3</sup> Jiirgen Habermas, *The Crisis of the European Union: A Response,* trails. Cia.ran Cronin (Cambridge, Polity Press, 20 12), chapter 2, 'The concept of human dignity and the realistic utopia of human rights'. 4 Q: Which of the following prominent philosophers who have published a major book, chapter, or article in the last ten years on dignity mentioned it before then? a) Seyla Benhabib, b) Ronald Dworkin, c) Jiirgen Habermas, d) George Kateb, e) Av.ishai Margalit, f) Jeremy Waldron. A: g) none of the above. Kantians before the recent present, from Hermann Cohen to John Rawls, have done without the concept. Apparently the crucial pioneer in contemporary philosophical discussion is Thomas E. Hill, Jr, *Dignity and Practical Reason in Kant's Moral Theory* (Ithaca, NY, Cornell University Press, 1992). Before recently, the main thinkers of note to explore (let alone advocate) dignity were conservative. See, for example, Aurel Kolnai, 'Dignity', *Philosophy* 51 (1976), 251-71; Robert Spaemann, 'Ober den Begriff der Menschenwiirde', in Ernst-Wolfgang Bockenforde and Robert Spaemann ( eds}, *Menschenrechte und Menschenwilrde: Historische Voraussetzungen, siikulare Gestalt, christliches Verstiindnis* (Stuttgart, Klett-Cotta, 1987); Hans-Georg Gadamer, 'Die Menschenwiirde auf ihrem Weg von der Antike his heute', *Humanistische Bildung* 12 (1988), 95-107.

constitutionalism-the constitutionalism of Christian democracy. So far as I know, there is no general historical study of its emergence; and though Ran Hirschl has contributed a valuable overview of what he provocatively calls 'constitutional theocracy', there is so far no recognition that it is the framework in which human dignity first became canonized. 5 This religious constitutionalism crystallized in the 1930s, when it seemed to many as if secular liberalism had no future. It was initially part of a replacement package for that secular liberalism (and remained so in Germany in 1949). The conventional narrative of the trajectory of constitutional dignity, in other words, is by and large false. Recovering the true sources of the constitutionalization of human dignity may, further, force a different light on a crucial phase in the norm's trajectory.

# Around March 1937: Catholic dignity between corporatism and civil society

More specifically, anyone interested in human dignity as we know it should be interested in March 1937-when it made its spectacular entry into world politics, including constitutional politics.

That dignity long ago originated as one status word among others in a universe of aristocratic values is now undoubted, but this fact, or the 'democratization of aristocracy', does very little to explain the specifics of its ideological trajectory in the 1930s and 1940s-let alone since.6 As late as the 1930s, in tune with its millennia! prior trajectory, dignity attached to a huge range of objects, humanity rarely, and individual humanity extremely rarely, among them. There was thus little prior basis for the novelty that Ireland's constitution registered, whatever the minor circulation of the word in world affairs, including one or two constitutional articles, earlier. Then events in international Catholicism intervened, with the Irish constitutionalization of individual dignity as leading concept being one consequence.

In fact, dignity already had an important place in Catholic politics in March 193 7, but it was radically different from the one it has had since then, thanks to the epoch-making reassignment from *groups* to *individuals* that the concept underwent. At the beginning of the month, thanks to Pope Pius XI's

<sup>5</sup> Ran Hirschi, *Constitutional Theocracy* (Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press, 2010).

<sup>6</sup> See, for example, James Q. Whitman, '"Human dignity" in Europe and the United States: the social foundations', *Human Rights Law Journa/25* (2004), 17-23, and, on Whitman's themes, the various essays culminating in Jeremy Waldron, *Dignity, Rank, and Rights,* ed. Meir Dan-Cohen (Oxford, Oxford University Press, 2012).

#### 98 *Samuel Mayn*

encyclicals *Casti cannubi* (1930) and *Quadragesima anna* (1931 ), dignity still attached primarily to collective entities like workers and religious sacraments like marriage. Though not utterly without precedent, it was in March 1937 that dignity attaching to individuals (more precisely, persons) crystallized as a visible ideological option. In the 1930s, no one could have guessed what would become of this option, in large part because the Irish Constitution's version of dignity reflected such a minority political choice in the landscape of political Catholicism. After all, the years during which it was framed were the period in which Catholic states were rising, typically based on corporatist rather than supplementary individualist notions.

These Catholic states remained true to the corporatist version of dignity, in which it was family or labour that was dignified, not persons (and thus not persons with rights). 7 Preceded by a year by Antonio Salazar's Portuguese constitution, the purest move to constitutional corporatism occurred in Austria in 1934, which 'Austro-fascist' Catholic leader Engelbert Dollfuss consciously announced as enacting *Quadragesima anna's* corporatist principles. Not long afterwards, Spain, with its secular and indeed anticlerical constitution of 1931, fell prey to coup and dictatorship, and Francisco Franco introduced dignity to the quasi-constitutional documents of his regime in allegiance to reigning corporatist orthodoxy.8 In the international Catholic context, the framing of the Irish constitution occurred in the shadow of this impressive wave of dignitarian corporatism.

Yet it also took place at a time of novel and at first brief and modest availability of a dignitarian alternative based on persons-an alternative it happened to register. The central source of the conceptual work to make possible the Irish Constitution's assignment of 'dignity' to the individual was in a raucous French dispute of the mid-1930s about the nature of Catholic politips, among those recovering from an earlier flirtation with far right politics and in a dispute with persisting reactionaries about what sort of response to offer to the secular liberalism that everyone thought was on its deathbed.

The leading historian of this dispute, James Chappel, has dubbed the conflict as one between corporatists (who in France would ultimately support the Vichy regime in the name of Christian principle) and 'civil society Catholics'. The intellectual debate and political controversy between these two groups assumed its classic form as a response to the Popular Front, for the dispute

<sup>7</sup> For the best survey in these years, see Tom Buchanan and Martin Conway (eds), *Political Catholicism in Europe, 1918-1965* (Oxford, Oxford University Press, 1996).

<sup>8</sup> See *Fundamental Laws of the State: The Spanish Constitution* (Madrid, SIE, 1967).

raging in 1934-6 was about what sort of alternative to offer to the frightening alliance of communists and socialists of the era.

These two groups of Catholics agreed on the rejection of the modem, liberal, secular republic in the name of the dispersal of authority to the 'natural' social hierarchy established by God, and descending through and including religious institutions, local communities, and patriarchal families. But where the civil society Catholics differed was in their assignment of importance to what they called 'the human person' as an element in the mix. The human person, a central icon of civil society Catholicism transnationally starting in 1934, would become the bearer of 'dignity'. Corporatists themselves, Chappel shows, referred to the human person too; just as some oftheir civil society foes ended up supporting the Vichy regime. But it seems clear that 'the dignity of the human person' mainly became a slogan for civil society Catholics attempting to stave off both secular liberalism with its destitute atomism and corporatist reaction, with its demand for integral religious politics or flirtation with 'pagan' regimes.9

In spite of the emergence of the civil society option, corporatist ideology offered the dominant version of political Catholicism until the outcome of the Second World War made Spain and Portugal seem not like the wave of an exciting future but a relic of past mistakes. Seriously outnumbered in spite of sharing many premises with their corporatist foes, civil society Catholics opened another path in the 1930s, which few took until later; individual dignity emerged, essentially, as a marker on that path. Consider as an example of civil society dissidence Joseph Vialatoux's speech, at the time of the finalization of the Irish Constitution, to the Semaines Sociales in Lyon (an annual summer camp of this faction). Its title: 'Dignity of the Group? Or of the Human Person?' 10

'It may not be excessive', Vialatoux commented, 'to say that this very question defines the historical moment in which we live.' He inveighed against specifically biological and generally naturalistic approaches, which tended to view the human group as the locus of significance, arguing instead that Christianity brought the metaphysics of spirituality-which made the human person the site of dignity. Yet Vialatoux's preference for individual dignity, it bears noting, did not connote the corollary of 'human rights'. That revolutionary concept, in spite of its ostensible priority of persons, remained in what Vialatoux called a 'bastard union' with 'naturalist philosophy', and

<sup>9</sup> See James Chappel, 'Slaying the leviathan: Catholicism and the rebirth of European conservatism, 1920-1950' (PhD dissertation, Columbia University, 2012).

<sup>10</sup> Joseph Vialatoux, 'Dignite du groupe? Ou de Ia personne humaine?: Physique et metaphysique de l'ordre des valeurs', in *La Personne humaine en peril* (Lyon, Semaines sociales, 1938).

elicited the equally erroneous sequels first of secular nationalism then of counter-revolutionary racism. The 'dignity of the human person' was to be a response to all these mistakes. It was now critical to assert dignity against the 'depersonalized individual' of both revolutionary naturalism and counterrevolutionary naturalism. It would save the 'person' buried in revolutionary, secular politics from its own misguided proponents, and make it the foundation stone of a spiritual community rather than the materialist totalitarianism of communism and fascism alike. 11

Vialatoux had posed his question about whether to give individual or group dignity priority in early 1937, but, far from crying in the wilderness against totalitarianism, by summertime when he gave his lecture it must have seemed as if the individualist option had garnered the highest possible support: from the Pope himself. It was for this reason above all-and not because of the Irish constitution-that March 193 7 was a great month for civil society Catholics. That month, stung by the failure of earlier overtures towards and negotiations with Nazi Germany, Pope Pius XI condemned German incursion on church rights, and a week later issued his stirring encyclical *Divini redemptoris* 'on atheistic communism'. The dignity of the individual surged in world public discourse essentially because of this. It was hard not to see the sheer coincidence of these encyclicals as the Pope's own version of totalitarianism theory-though it remained utterly unclear what the proper alternative to 'totalitarianism' really was. Interestingly, however, 'dignity' was basic only in the second, anti-communist encyclical.

In fact, the failure to respect the dignity of the human person was repeatedly identified-and starting in March 1937 was to be so for decades-as communism's central error. Communism, the text reads, 'strips man of his liberty, robs human personality of all its dignity, and removes all the moral restraints that check the eruptions of blind impulse'. Simultaneously too authoritarian and too liberatory, communism reduced man to matter, and thus also interfered with the source of moral agency. That it 'denies the rights, dignity and liberty of human personality' also made it an affront to moral norms. Put differently, dignity offered an individualism that, far from atomizing humanity, offered the true first principle of community and society, for 'each individual man in the dignity of his human personality ... is supplied with all that is necessary for the exercise of his social functions'. 12 It was thus not strange that in Irish hands, individual dignity connected with the common

<sup>11</sup> Vialatoux, 'Dignite du groupe?', 123, 132-3.

<sup>12</sup> On the encyclical in the larger context of the Church's anticommunist politics, see Giuliana Chamedes, 'Reinventing Christian Europe: Vatican diplomacy, transnational anticommunism, and the erosion of the Church-state divide' (PhD dissertation, Columbia University, 2012), chapter 6.

good and theological virtues, since it shared in the consensus phobia of basing politics on an apparently destitute secular individualism.

Ignored in the contemporary literature on 'dignity', *Divini redemptoris*  was epoch-making, for it gave the concept as an incident of individuals or persons by far its highest profile entry in world politics to that date. It also gave a lift to the civil society Catholics' insistence that dignity did not primarily attach to groups. And the crucial revisions of the Irish Constitution that led to the appearance of individual dignity in its preamble also occurred in this period-very precisely, in the immediate aftermath of the encyclical. This accidental coincidence forms the basis of my case about what dignity meant when it became an Irish touchstone, anticipating many later developments.

## Ireland and the coming of religious constitutionalism

The many historians oflreland's Constitution, notably the accomplished Dermot Keogh, have simply missed the relevance of its dignitarian tum. Unaware oflreland's comparative priority when it comes to dignity, they have therefore failed to place the document in international context to explain this priority. 13 The Irish Constitution, of course, needs to be read in a number of contexts, of which the one I will emphasize-international Catholic thought and politics-is merely one. But it is this context that matters inasmuch as the Irish Constitution registered an international development that would later mark the UN Charter and the Basic Law-and thus make possible everything that followed based on their language.

Eamon de Valera, Fianna Fail party leader and, from 1932, new Irish prime minister, wrote the Irish Constitution after brief and informal consultation with a tiny group of advisers, before unveiling his handiwork in April 1937 for approval. Though the wave of the Catholic future may well have seemed to be corporatist constitutionalism on the European continent at this moment, the Irish Constitution clearly could not go there-in spite of the hopes of some Irish Catholic integralists who were consulted during the process. An evanescent movement of Irish fascists known as the Blue shirts who trumpeted Catholic principle rose and fell in the mid-1930s; and around the same time as the Constitution was in preparation, Paddy Belton's fearsomely

<sup>&#</sup>x27; 3 See, for example, Dermot Keogh and Andrew McCarthy, *The Making of the Irish Constitution 1937: Bunreacht na hEireann* (Cork, Mercier Press, 1997), striking for its inattention to the preamble generally.

reactionary militant group, the Irish Christian Front, emerged. 14 But de Valera had no truck with these groups, nor with any other version of illiberal corporatism.

Indeed, the primary impulse for engineering a new constitutional process at all was negative. De Valera had long since committed himself vigorously to scuttling the Constitution of the Irish Free State of 1922 in the name of a new order. That the Anglo-Irish Treaty of 1921 had not allowed Ireland full sovereignty, and that the first constitution imposed a galling loyalty oath to the British crown (which de Valera deleted immediately in 1933), gave them so repulsive a stigma as to be unsalvageable. 15 The happenstance that the drafting of de Valera's long-sought replacement of the unacceptable text with a new one occurred in the winter and spring of 1936-7 proved fateful for the history of dignity, however. The process replaced a document of the so-called 'new constitutionalism' with a very different constitutional affair.

The Irish Constitution was not just a 'negative' success after all. The country's move beyond its prior dominion constitution to assert its 'rightful independence' reflected Catholic social thought in its positive outlook in a series of ways, and not surprisingly, given the centrality of Catholicism to Irish nationalism in the 1930s and long after. 16 De Valera, a devoted Catholic passionately committed to the greater presence of the country's dominant religion in the constitution, was above all a politician. He deftly manoeuvred to

14 Fearghal McGarry, *Irish Politics and the Spanish Civil War* (Cork, Cork University Press, 1999), especially chapter 4.

16 In a recent piece on another subject, historian Perry Anderson makes the following pertinent and perhaps outrageous comparative remarks: 'In the history of 20th-century nationalism, there is a distinct sub-group in which religion played a central organising role from the start, providing so to speak the genetic code of the movement. The most significant cases are those which eventually founded stable parliamentary democracies. The three leading states of this type in the world today are Ireland, Israel.and India. In all three, the nationalist party that came to power after independence--Fine Gael, Mapai, Congress-distanced itself from the confessional undertow of the struggle without ever being able to tackle its legacy head-on. In each case, as the ruling party gradually lost its lustre, it was outflanked by a more extreme rival that had fewer inhibitions about appealing directly to the theological passions aroused by the original struggle: Fianna Fail, Likud, BJP. The success of these parties was due not just to the faltering of the first wave of office-holders, but to their ability to articulate openly what had always been latent in the national movement, but neither candidly acknowledged nor consistently repudiated. They could claim, with a certain justice, to be legitimate heirs of the original cause. In each case, the setting was a parliamentary system, in which they operated constitutionally, if in each case with certain prewar sympathies for European fascism .... The Irish reversion came within a decade of independence--its carrier was the genuinely more popular and radical wing of the national movement, with the greatest anti-colonial legitimacy-and enjoyed the longest ascendancy, only finally collapsing last year'. P. Anderson, 'After Nehru', *London Review of Books* (2 August 2012).

<sup>15</sup> Leo Kohn, *The Constitution of the Irish Free State* (London, Allen and Unwin, 1934); for de Valera's views, see, for example, Ronan Fanning, 'Mr. De Valera drafts a constitution', in B. Farrell ( ed.), *De Valera s Constitution and Ours* (Dublin, Gill and Macmillan, 1988), 34.

take account of the views of the episcopacy and various Catholic authorities, while also assuming final control of the details of drafting. In particular, de Valera saw the preamble as the place to achieve symbolic Christianization of the document, while specific articles would offer a considerable incorporation (though not total lock) of Catholicism on Irish politics. In this approach, de Valera may have been more canny than most comparative scholars of constitutions, who regularly slight preambles, though they are the most meaningful and memorable parts of founding texts to citizens.

In the preamble and in general, de Valera never wanted to go, nor could go, as far as reactionary or even doctrinally conservative Catholics desired. The constitutionalization of the freedom and dignity of the individual, in short, can be taken as a symbol of de Valera's larger balancing act, in which he crafted a Christian democratic synthesis throughout the document. In an era of the victory of Catholic corporatism or outright fascism, Ireland proved a peripheral laboratory of civil society Catholicism or even post-Second World War Christian Democracy. Keogh plausibly comments:

> De Valera had little or nothing in common with the authoritarian Catholic leaders of the 1930s. He did not make a fetish out of religion like the 'monkish' Salazar of Portugal. He was repelled by the extremism of General Francisco Franco's *cruzada.* De Valera exhibited none of the demagoguery practised by the Central European Catholic dictators of the 1930s ... [He was] both patriotic and loyally Roman Catholic, but in a very independent way. 17

If it meant more than the anti-communist politics of *Divini redemptoris,* de Valera's registration ofthe dignitarian individualist rather than the dignitarian corporatist strand of political Catholicism of the moment encapsulates this broader stance. Negotiating between forsaken secular liberalism and rising Catholic reaction, it offered religiously inflected conservative democracy.

Comparison of de Valera's handiwork with the 1922 constitution he patriotically scuttled makes this graphically clear. The earlier document had been very much in the spirit of the liberal 'new constitutionalism' of the immediate moment after the First World War in its attitudes to church and state, religious pluralism, and gender; its 1937 replacement was a Christianizing document of a religious constitutionalism of religious democracy. Apparently, it was the first such document. 18 Its approach to property, for example, drew substantially on *Quadragesimo anna,* while its article on religion acknowledged

<sup>17</sup> Dermot Keogh, 'Church, state, and society', in Brian Farrell (ed.), *De Valera's Constitution and Ours* (Dublin, Gill and Macmillan, 1988), 104.

<sup>18</sup> Noel Browne, 'Church and state in modern Ireland', in Tim Murphy and Patrick Twomey (eds), *Ireland's Evolving Constitution, 1937-97: Collected Essays* (Oxford, Hart, 1998), 46-7.

the Catholic Church's 'special position' .19 Its article on family and gender perhaps went furthest in qualifying the secular liberalism of the prior constitutional exercise.

Irish feminists, agitating for the group most obviously affected by such changes, registered its consequences immediately-though it is also true that Ireland never took up the fully maternalist turn of other places where Catholic social thought was enacted as authoritarian policy in this era.20 The new draft constitution deleted the existing constitution's promise of equal rights without distinction to sex, which feminists feared might even strip women of the hard-won vote. (They succeeded in restoring the clause in ratification debates.) And, as ratified, the constitution's controversial Article 41 enshrined a traditionalist vision of the family. On a symbolic level, the article made clear that whatever the dignity of persons meant, it was inseparable from the centrality offamilies, which in turn depended on women's 'life within the home'. More substantively, the article constitutionally prohibited divorce (a prohibition lifted only six decades later in the constitution's fifteenth amendment).

Even as feminist complaints were. marginalized, throughout this period (and indeed long after) a huge dispute swirled around the wording of Article 44, in which Cahill and others wanted to name the Catholic Church as the true Christian Church. But de Valera, in spite of his own apparent sympathies, ultimately understood he could not do so, setting out to balance Catholicism's pre-eminence with acknowledgement of minority faiths and religious freedom. It was, after all, a country with a Protestant population of 25 per cent (including the contested north, which the constitution claimed as part of the nation). Article 44 illustrated, once again, that the larger effort balanced between competing extremes of secular liberalism and religious authoritarianism.

It also caused no little difficulty for de Valera in his search for ecclesiastical imprimatur. In mid-April, two weeks before unveiling his handiwork to the public, he sent his emissary Joseph Walshe to Rome for endorsement. But Eugenio Pacelli, then the Vatican Secretary of State communicating for the already sick Pope whom he would succeed, refused to comply. Pacelli reminded Walshe that failure to acknowledge the Catholic Church as the true one was technically heretical, though Pacelli grasped that de Valera felt his

<sup>19</sup> Constitution oflreland (1937), Article 44.

<sup>20</sup> This paragraph relies upon Maria Luddy, 'A "sinister and retrogressive" proposal: Irish women's opposition to the 1937 Draft Constitution', *Transactions of the Royal Historical Society* 15 (2005), 175-95. For comparison's sake, see Francine Muel-Dreyfus, *Vichy and the Eternal Feminine: A Contribution to the Political Sociology of Gender,* trans. Kathleen A. Johnson (Durham, NC, Duke University Press, 200 I), especially part 3.

situation forced him into theological error. 'Ni approvo ni non disapprovo; taceremo' (I don't approve, but I also don't disapprove; I will remain silent), Pacelli told Walshe in the Pope's name-which was nonetheless a crushing result for de Valera, who had striven to explain to Rome that he was constrained by the fact of his Protestant minority from the more full-blown Catholic ideal he personally desired for the document. 'It did not shake him when I contrasted the expressly Christian character of our new Constitution with the liberalism [continental sense] ofthe old', Walshe reported back glumly.21

De Valera thus did not go as far as some of his Catholic advisers and ecclesiastical authorities desired. But he did intend the Irish Constitution to mark the appearance of a new sort of Christian state, and the preamble in which dignity now appeared had a special role here. In the pained negotiations with the Vatican, dignity-which did not come up-was not enough to convince Pius XI (or the future Pius XII, speaking in his name) to sign off. Nonetheless, during the ratification process some months later, when de Valera faced unexpected opposition to the constitution for its excessive secularism (rather than its excessive confessionalism), the Christian credentials of dignity proved helpful. In spite of the Pope's earlier reluctance, the Vatican paper *L 'Osservatore Romano* providentially seemed to endorse the constitution. 'It differs from other constitutions', the paper noted, in an affirmation reported by the *Irish Press* that had a huge impact in placating the religious vote, 'because it is inspired by respect for the faith of the people, the dignity of the person, the sanctity of the family, of private property, and of social democracy. These principles are applied in a unique religious spirit, which animates the whole constitution. ' 22 It seems that Ireland's pioneering venture in a religious constitutionalism, in which individual dignity came to the fore, was generally understood in these terms by its friends as well as by its critics.23

21 Gerard Hogan (ed.), *The Origins of the Irish Constitution 1928-1941* (Dublin, Royal Irish Academy, 2012), 506 (Document 155, 22Aprill937).

22 *Irish Press* (17 May 1937), as cited in Dermot Keogh, *The Vatican, the Bishops, and Irish Politics 1919-1939* (Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1986), 219.

23 Compare with Arthur W. and Mary C. Bromage, 'The Irish Constitution: a discussion of its theoretical aspects', *Review of Politics* 2 (1940), 145-66. Certainly the document went far enough as to allow disputes to swirl for many decades around the degree to which Ireland had made natural law a constraint on democratic choices as well as judicial interpretation. Consider Vincent Grogan, 'The Constitution and the Natural Law', *Christus Rex* 7 (1954), 201-18; Declan Costello, 'The Natural Law and the Irish Constitution', *Studies* 45 (1956), 403-14; and John Maurice Kelly, *Fundamental Rights in the Irish Law and Constitution* (Dublin, Allen Figgis, 1961), especially 38-45.

# From the Irish Constitution to the basic law

That some Catholics sought an alternative to authoritarian and fascist solutions by appealing to dignity in these years, of course, does not at all mean that the faltering republics -of Europe were generally defended in their terms. It simply means that Catholics hewed out a conceptual possibility that was to have an unlikely fate in later history (up to and including our era). Secularists did not frame their republicanism in dignitarian terms, either before or after the Second World War. Further, during the war, just a few Catholics believed that allegiance to 'human dignity' entailed allegiance to 'human rights', which most Catholics following modem popes still considered the baleful child of the French Revolution and secularist evil, and which Catholics under authoritarian regimes were unsparingly told to spurn. Indeed, Catholic thinker Jacques Maritain, chief theoretician of civil society Catholicism and later premier interpreter of the Universal Declaration, did not connect dignity to 'human rights' untill942 at the earliest.24

But between 1942 and 1945, as the Allied war effort after Stalingrad looked forward to its ultimate triumph, more and more Catholics in general linked 'the dignity of the human person' hewed out in the prior decade to 'human rights'-including, heroically, those few in the French Resistance who criticized the Vichy regime's popular claim to restore Catholic morality on religious grounds. More important, as the war wore on, Pius XII himself invoked the dignity of the individual human person in his most widely noticed remarks. He had done so as high Vatican official-even while remaining silent on de Valera's handiwork-already in 1937, accepting the language of *Divini redemptoris.25* In wartime, his public usage accelerated to a striking degree. The Pope's invocation of human dignity during the war provided a bridge between what might otherwise have been a passing peculiarity of a few dissident theorists, along with the Irish constitution, and the post-war trajectory of the concept.

Thanks to Pius XII, in fact, individual dignity became an incredibly common concept across the Atlantic during the later phases of the Second World War, though much more work remains to be done to excavate wartime usage. To take one of sundry examples, Edmund A. Walsh, American Jesuit (and

<sup>24</sup> See Daniele Lorenzini, *Jacques Maritain e i diritte umani: fra totalitarismo, antisemitismo, e democrazia (1936-1951)* (Brescia, Morcelliana, 2012), which goes far beyond a couple of earlier essays of mine on the same topic.

<sup>25</sup> See 'Lettre deS. Em. le Cardinal Pacelli', in *La Personne humaine en peril,* which has a section on the 'Natural Dignity of the Person'.

founder of the Georgetown University School of Foreign Service which still bears his name), wrote in 1942:

> The conflict is between the rights of individual men, endowed with the dig- · nity of the human personality and elevated to the adopted sonship of God, on the one side, and the dehumanised, totalitarian state of Fichte, Hegel, Treitschke, Nietzsche, Hitler and the Tanaka Memorial of Japan on the other. This means not a world campaign of conventional belligerents [but] a World Revolution seeking to capture the soul ofhumanity.26

How many people understood the global conflict as a crusade for dignity is unclear, but Catholics on the right side often did.

As in interwar debates, dignity in such usages carried with it a communitarian and religious streak intended to distinguish it from the secularism of nineteenth-century liberalism. Writing in *Fortune* magazine shortly after discovering the contiguity of dignity and rights, Jacques Maritain still castigated modem man for 'claim[ing] human rights and dignity-without God, for his ideology grounded human rights and human dignity in a godlike, infinite autonomy of human will'. But he now referred to the apparently alternative 'concept of, and devotion to, the rights of the human person' as 'the most significant political improvement of modern times' _27 Notably in Pius XU's Christmas message to the world of 1944, human dignity in a similarly invidious conception teemed to a degree completely unprepared for by prior papal exhortation. A telos for and a check on democracy, and a commitment that would save it from levelling equality and secularizing materialism, dignity became one of Pius XII's key slogans, and would also play a central role in Cold War rhetoric throughout the Catholic universe and beyond.28

It was thus papal usage that proved of most direct relevance to post-war affairs-the bridge from the late 1930s to the late 1940s. The decisive waystation was the UN Charter. As political theorist Charles Beitz has recently discovered, it was Barnard College dean Virginia Gildersleeve, in her cosmetic work on South African Jan Smuts's draft ofthe UN Charter's preamble, who introduced the allusion to 'the dignity and worth of the human person' .29 But

<sup>26</sup> Cited in Patrick McNamara, *A Catholic Cold War: EdmundA. Walsh, S.J., and the Politics of American Anticommunism* (New York, Fordham University Press, 2005), 114.

<sup>27</sup> Jacques Maritain, 'Christian humanism', *Fortune,* Apri11942.

<sup>28</sup> For further details, see Giuliana Chamedes, 'Pius XII, rights talk, and the dawn of the religious Cold War', in D. Pendas (ed.), *Religion and Human Rights* (New York, Oxford University Press, forthcoming).

<sup>29</sup> Charles R. Beitz, 'Human dignity and human rights', working paper, which improves on the sketchy account in Christopher McCrudden, 'Dignity and the judicial interpretation of rights', *European Journal of international Law* 19 (2008), 655-724. Strangely, neither acknowledges the existence, let alone centrality, of papal usage in these years, though it is the obvious source of international invocations.

it is self-evident that the prominence of this notion in wartime-explaining its eligibility for Gildersleeve's fix-was thanks to the Pope more than all others, even all others combined, including in its connection to rights. (No American sources, in particular, conjoin human dignity and human rights earlier than or outside the framework of the Catholic sources mentioned above, and in the Pope's widely circulating language above all.)

The ground that human dignity provided human rights during the war is thus hard to describe as an unalloyed liberal victory. Dignity, it seems, helped wrest human rights from the French Revolution specifically and liberal secularism generally, in an era when both were so frequently represented in transatlantic public culture as stepping stones to totalitarianism. Not surprisingly, when conservative democracy came to post-war Germany, dignity could now have a crucial role, in constitutions that-like Ireland's before them-were grounded on the Christian God and human dignity together as the first principles of a new sort of democracy. This gesture occurred in Germany in the form of the several sub-federal *Lander* constitutions (especially the absolutely critical Bavarian constitution of 1946) before it was repeated in the Basic Law of the new federal republic.30

Implying Christian democracy, the Irish Constitution was thus in spite of its initially accidental and contingent breakthrough a premonitory document of the direction political Catholicism would eventually take after guns decided the larger direction of history. Drawing on the tradition established by his predecessor in his anti-communist breakthrough, dignity for Pius II by late wartime implied conservative democracy rather than authoritarian corporatism (or outright fascism). True democracy protected human dignity, the Pope warned, while false democracy sacrificed it on the altar of secularism, materialism, and relativism. ContinentalEurope followed this advice after the Second World War, with Western restabilization occurring under the auspices of conservative democracy supervised by a new sort of Christian political party, with Catholics in the lead. International institutions, once rejected by Catholics from the grassroots to the Pope as masonic rule, became prized sources of supra-sovereign moral norms. Dignity signalled these commitments.

<sup>30</sup> The preamble of the Bavarian 1946 text, written by Christian politician Alois Hundhammer, reads: 'Before the field of rubble, to which a state and social order without God and without knowledge and respect of human dignity have led the survivors of World War II ... '

#### Conclusion: concepts, language, and politics

The Irish Constitution matters not intrinsically but instrumentally: in the current enthusiasm over human dignity, it decisively establishes both the right chronology and the 'original meaning' of its constitutionalization in the circumstances of religious democracy. It is, as it were, like a tape recorder that, because it was on at the right time, captures the moment in which an accident happened that still determines our discourse.

Needless to say, for the Catholic world and European politics generally, the Irish assignment of dignity to the individual human being in 1937-like the other tentative proposals of Christian democracy at the time--certainly · did not settle matters. That took a war, in which illiberal corporatism was taken off the table as an option for political Catholicism, with much blood spilled in the process, though the survival of' clerico-fascist' Spain and Portugal for many decades allowed some diehards to cherish the flame of reactionary dignity.

After the war, the peripheral Irish constitutionalization of individual dignity found a surer home, notably in West Germany, where a roughly similar sort of Christian democracy was founded. Constitutional dignity for individuals was thus invented as part of what became the unanticipated post-Second World War supremacy of Christian democracy. But one should understand this claim correctly. Dermot Keogh long ago proposed seeing de Valera as a 'Christian Democrat' _31 The trouble with this otherwise illuminating interpretation is that there was no Christian democratic hegemony in Europe until after the Second World War-whose violence was required to open the possibility for its decades-long reign. But after it, de Valera's originally eccentric and peripheral synthesis of Catholicism and democracy suddenly became modish, and individualist dignity became a more prevalent foundation stone, in the Basic Law not least.

Obviously, those living under the regimes of the religious constitutionalism of Christian democracy could depart from original meanings, and unquestionably did so as the post-Second World War era wore on. This is especially true in a place like Germany (and Ireland too), where the huge influence of Catholicism on constitutional theory and practice has waned so substantially over the intervening decades that its original importance risks being forgotten or suppressed. 32

<sup>31</sup> Dermot Keogh, *Ireland and Europe, 1918-1948* (Dublin, Gill and Macmillan, *1988),passim.* 

<sup>32</sup> For Catholicism in the early years of the Basic Law, see Hans Maier, 'Katholische Sozial- und Staatslehre und neuere Deutsche Staatslehre', *Archiv des offentlichen Rechts* 93 (1968), 1-36, and now especially Frieder Giinther, *Denken vom Staat her: Die bundesdeutsche Staatsrechtslehre zwischen* 

#### 110 *Samue!Moyn*

In the history of words and concepts, including constitutional ones, genesis certainly does not account for use (let alone validity). As a result, dignity's functions today are no longer fully controlled by its original deployments. But my story does establish a starting point; and starting points sometimes remain relevant-as the starting point of individual human dignity doessince diverse Catholic voices remain central to the bitter contemporary struggles over its implications. History nevertheless shows that individual dignity could be given a liberal or conservative Catholic meaning, or an ecumenical Christian meaning, or (mostly later) a non-Christian meaning.

Looking around the world, no one would say that religious constitutionalism is a thing of the past, but it is fair to say that human dignity is no longer tightly, let alone exclusively, are tethered to its framework. 33 Starting points matter; but ultimately, both in theory and practice, they explain less and less as time passes about the course of the struggles that occur in their terms, whether at the level of constitutional keywords or constitutional politics generally.34 In particular, therefore, my story not only acknowledges but insists that some rather recent account is required for the intense focus today on dignity.35 In the academy, the belated and surprising return of Kantianism to prestige uted something, to be sure, with the proviso that contemporary secular liberals claiming Kant's mantle did not turn to the touchstone of dignity until very late in their revivalism. The wave of recent constitutions invoking it-notably the South African-and the sudden relevance of international human rights law also clearly contributed to the salience of human dignity.36

*Dezision und Integration 1949-1970* (Munich, Oldenbourg, 2004). For the Irish case, see, for example, John H. Whyte, *Church and State in Modem Ireland, 19 23-1970* (Dublin, Gill and Macmillan, 1971 ), chapter 11.

<sup>33</sup> Some, to be sure, laud religious constitutionalism as an alternative to even less liberal politics, and perhaps as a transitional device towards even more liberal politics. Consider, for example, Jan-Werner MUller's argument that contemporary Islamism should take the same turn reactionary Catholicism once did thanks to Christian Democracy. In European history, however, religious constitutionalism *followed* secular constitutionalism in crisis circumstances; and it ascended compared with other options thanks to victory in war. More theoretically, the trouble with Muller's argument is the thought that formal constitutionalism is itself a causal factor of transformation; it might equally well lead to stabilization of 'constitutional theocracy', without further external intervention or political secularization. See, for example, Muller, 'From Christian democracy to Muslim democracy?', *Project Syndicate,*  October 2008.

<sup>34</sup> For two later such struggles, see Reva B. Siegel, 'Dignity and sexuality: claims on dignity in transnational debates over abortion and same-sex marriage' *,'International Journal of Constitutional Law*  10 (April2012), 355-79, emphasizing how dignity could be repurposed to-serve various social agendas.

<sup>35</sup> For a start, see Oliver Sensen, 'Human dignity in historical perspective: the contemporary and traditional paradigms', *European Journal of Political Theory* 10 (2006), 71-91.

<sup>36</sup> Erin Daly, *Dignity Rights: Courts, Constitutions, and the Worth of the Human Person* (Philadelphia, PA, Pennsylvania University Press, 2012).

But such redeployment occurs through the muddying of multifarious contestation rather than the simplicity of first coinage. Stabilization (and therefore isolation) of meaning can occur at any point, but, especially when it comes to an open-textured term like 'dignity', is normally a daunting, partial, and temporary achievement. It is presumably easiest at the beginning rather than in the struggle for redefinition, for the same reason it is simplest to start with a blank canvas rather than attempt to alter an existing picture. The redefinitional struggle may make special sense or even count as a requirement, of course, when key words happen to have been embedded in authoritative legal documents like national constitutions and international treaties, notably to the extent that courts are willing to interpret them as of independent legal significance.37 Continuing redefinition of existing words as partisan struggle continues is, indeed, a main business of politics.

The time may come, however, when it will seem wiser to coin new terms because disputes around the old ones are irresolvable. I believe that this stage has been reached with respect to 'human dignity', since it is too controverted to be available not simply for pristine use but even for meaningful invocation. Like an oversqueezed orange, dignity may have no more to give to any side in a struggle. No concept is useful or useless until someone tries to use it and succeeds or fails; the trouble with dignity is not that it is useless in theory but that the practice of political combat has made it much more so.38

Its beginnings were rather distinctive, then, compared with today. At a very different historical moment from ours, individual dignity originally entered world and constitutional politics as some Catholic actors struggled to establish it as a valuable tool; and the Irish constitution, like the German Basic Law that followed it, was a moment of relative success in this regard. Now it may be time to look for other things, especially as the persisting remnants and new versions of the religious constitutionalism of the 1930s command less and less respect.

<sup>37</sup> Famously, dignity in Germany was initially a *nicht interpretierte These* or strictly symbolic provision, but German judges departed from this original understanding long ago, and the Irish story is roughly similar. For some cases, see Teresa Iglesias, 'The dignity of the individual in the Irish Constitution: the importance of the Preamble', *Studies* 89 (2000), 19-34.

<sup>38</sup> See, notoriously, Ruth Macklin, 'Dignity is a useless concept', *British Medical Journa/237* (2003), 1419-20.